---
layout: post
title: "Exploring FDA 503B Outsourcing Facility Data with R"
date: 2021-07-09
published: true
---

The FDA publishes data on all of the facility inspections that it performs, this data can be accessed by any interested party. The data is accessible as [FDA-483 forms](https://www.fda.gov/drugs/human-drug-compounding/registered-outsourcing-facilities#3) which detail observations made by FDA inspectors in the course of their inspections. FDA-483 forms are publicly available but are published as PDFs, making data extraction a laborious process. It also makes drawing conclusions about trends in FDA inspections difficult. 

While interning in a 503B compounding facility I was asked to extract data from all published FDA-483 reports that relate to 503B facilities and combine the observation data into a single data set. Then to take this data set and draw conclusions about what the FDA would be looking for on their next inspection of the facility. You can find an up to date copy of the report [here.](https://www.mattburns.info/FDA-483.html)

#### Data Extraction and Categorization

As mentioned before data extraction from FDA-483 forms was a manual process, which required reading and summarizing each individual observation made. It was immediately apparent that each observation made was fairly unique, it would be a challenge to place each one into just a handful of categories. Oversimplification of the data would also mean losing actionable information, we hoped to take proactive action in response to what we learned from these reports. 

From the published FDA-483 forms for registered 503B facilities we extracted 697 unique observations. Each data point consisted of a facility name, a start and end date for the inspection, and finally of a summary of the observation made. As mentioned above we had determined that the classification system would need to be fairly specific to preserve the usability of our results. We determined that we would give each observation a general category, an observation type, and finally a specific category. This would allow us to look at the data in both broad and as needed in finer detail. 

This system resulted in classifications like this: 

| Categorization                                                      | Observation                                                                                                                                            |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| production_general, deficiency, qc_investigation | Complaint records are deficient and don't include follow up or findings of investigations.                     |
| production_sterile, validation, testing_sterility      | Lack of assurance of sterility, not all methods of sterilizations have been evaluated for effectiveness. |

Obviously these fairly broad categories are useful because they allow us to extract trends from the data, but without knowing the specific observation made it would be difficult to take any specific proactive action. 